Nora Cowherd
Tyler Ransom
4 December 2017
Ancient Coins
Professor Smith


Iconography of Cornucopia


        For our research project we investigated the iconography of Cornucopias when they appear on -typically the reverse side- of ancient coins. We were inspired to learn more about Cornucopias because one of the coins we catalogued had a cornucopia on the reverse side - coin 2001.243 (depicting a woman holding a scale in her right hand and a cornucopia in her left hand). We investigated the traditional meaning of the Cornucopia and tried to interpret its use in ancient coinage. 
        The Cornucopia typically represents “abundance, fecundity, fertility, and happiness.”[1] In some coins of Antoninus Pius the Cornucopiae is held in the left hand by a figure who represents the Roman people.[2] This image was intended to represent the abundance of the Roman Empire and how this abundance is shared by its subjects. 
        In order to see the reverse sign of the coin more wholistically in order to attempt to interpret its message we looked at what other types of things are frequently portrayed on the reverse side of the roman coinage.


Total number of coins in Ocre that Contain a Cornucopia (it is spelled Cornucopiae in OCRE); 6,411. OCRE has 42,748 coins. This means that Cornucopias appear on just about 15% of Roman Imperial coins. 


Type 1; Liberalitas is shown holding the cornucopia. There are several different iterations of this same theme but the vast majority of them show Liberalitas in some stage of giving money to the poor. In some she is “about to” pour out a cornucopia full of coins, in others she is pouring out the coins, in some she is specifically pouring them into a poor person’s toga. Another popular iteration is that she has an account board in her left hand and her cornucopiae in her right hand (presumably to organize how to distributes charity to the poor). 
        Liberalitas was frequently used on medals which are distributed to memorialize an event where the emperor was very generous towards his people. Liberalitas holding a cornucopia on coins it often is symbolizing the Roman practice of giving extra money to the citizens in order to prevent famine and other poverty plights.[3] When analyzing this reverse side, it is interesting to see that a cornucopia was was normally meant to hold food would be holding coins on the reverse sides that had liberalitas since these reverse sides were minted to honor the practice of the empire giving extra money to its citizens.
        There are 444 coins that depict Liberalitas giving or about to give away coins. That means that about 7% of coins that had cornucopias on them also had Liberalitas. About 10% of the coins with Liberalitas were minted by Marcus Aurelius which is significant because Marcus Aurelius was known for being a very generous emperor when it came to giving to the poor. The message of this coin aligns well with his reign.[4] 


Type 2; A lot of ancient coins would assign certain iconography to a figure in order to help the person who is looking at the picture more easily identify the figure. Such is the case with our next type. The figure Aequitas which represented fairness would be shown holding scales typically in her right hand and a cornucopia in her left. This is the reverse side of the coin mentioned earlier - 2001.243. The figure Moneta would be shown with the same symbols. Aequitas symbolizes the balance between justice and equity. Moneta means money in ancient Rome. 
        It is interesting that the personification of Aequitas and of Moneta shows the scale of justice and a cornucopia parallel to one another. In the context of these two personifications it seems that the cornucopia represents equity. It could also have an even more complicated meaning- capitalism. I think it may be possible that the cornucopia could be representing capitalism in this context because the symbol generally symbolizes abundance and it is countered by justice. Injustice is often a main criticism of capitalism since the system benefits some but can hurt others so it is possible this coin has this meaning as well. 
        The cornucopia appears with scales 12.7% of the time. 


Type 3; Fortuna holding a cornucopia in her left hand which occurs on 13.2% of coins. This is another instance where the cornucopia helps with the identification of the figure. Cornucopia is often depicted holding a cornucopia since she is the goddess of luck and fortune so she is in charge of abundance.[5] The cornucopia here is most likely placed on the reverse side in order to aid in identification purposes and because it is part of the depiction of Fortuna. It also is an upbeat identification of her since another way Fortuna is distinguished is by placing her foot over a globe to symbolize that our futures are unknown. It is probably more refreshing to instead give her a symbol of abundance. 


Type 4; Genius Populi Romani standing left, holding patera over flaming altar in right hand and cornucopiae in left. This coin is a little more obscure in its meaning. The romans believe that everyone was born with their genius- both good and bad. They would personify the genius of rome on coins and it is called “Genius Populi Romani.” When Genius Populi Romani appears on coins it can be in in three different contexts. The first context is that there are symbols that appear with it that allude to a certain city or place. Since this exact scene with the patera, altar, and cornucopia is pretty popular (being on 5.4% of coins with cornucopias) I would be surprised if that was what this coin was alluding to. It could also be making a comment about honoring the good part of genius, or alternatively pointing out the bad facets of the genius.[6]
        After examining the three different messages this coin could be sending- I believe that this coin is praising piety by should the patera over the alter. I am not sure what comment the coin is making on the Cornucopia. Perhaps the message is similar to the coin with Aequitas and Moneta - that religion needs to balance out equity. It could also just be there to symbolize the goodness of good fortune. Either way it is an interesting reverse side depiction.
        Conclusion;


        There are far more different reverse sides and coins that contain cornucopias in different scenes. I analyzed four that I thought were pretty common. The issue with trying to analyze every iteration of the patera is that some of the credible research on these specific scenes involving cornucopias is hard to come by. Also, there were a lot of reverse side scenes that I searched with OCRE did not have a lot of identical matches - or at least enough for me to believe it was a pattern. If I had more time and resources then there would be probably much more to learn about the way cornucopias are portrayed on coins and what they mean in different scenes.
        What is significant after reviewing the research done is how much the meaning of an object on a coin and change when the scene and objects around it are changed. The very distinct and different interpretations of a cornucopia on a coin are vast and reveal a lot about ancient culture in a way that other forms of preserved artifacts cannot. 
________________
[1] Stevenson, Seth William, et al. A dictionary of Roman coins: Republican and Imperial. B.A. Seaby, 1982.
[2] ibid
[3] ibid
[4] Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.26.9–11, qtd. and tr. Francis, 21 n. 1
[5] The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica. “Fortuna.” Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia Britannica, inc., 11 June 2010, www.britannica.com/topic/Fortuna-Roman-goddess.
[6] Stevenson, Seth William, et al. A dictionary of Roman coins: Republican and Imperial. B.A. Seaby, 1982.