Nora Cowherd
Tyler Ransom
4 December 2017
Ancient Coins
Professor Smith
Iconography of Cornucopia and Patera


For our research project we have decided to investigate the icons patera and cornucopia which we found on the coins we investigated. We would like to investigate their meaning and symbolism as well as their frequency of use and how it regards to the reigns of five different Roman emperors.
The coins of ours which had one of these images were  2001.243 (depicting a woman holding a scale in her right hand and a cornucopia in her left hand), and 2001.211 (Concordia standing, holding patera and sceptre), and 2001.250 (Salus sitting on seat, snake coiled around altar - feeding from patera in right hand). 
The Cornucopia typically represents “abundance, fecundity, fertility, and happiness.”[1] In some coins of Antoninus Pius the Cornucopiae is held in the left hand by a figure who represents the Roman people.[2] This image was intended to represent the abundance of the Roman Empire and how this abundance is shared by its subjects. 
Nova Roma explains that a Patera was a tool used to offer bits of food and wine from one’s meal to the gods. It was a way for Ancient Romans to share their meals with the gods. A practice that could seem similar to the modern custom of saying grace or a prayer before a meal to give thanks to the divine. 
Another important distinction to make when researching the iconography of objects that are being held in the Reverse of Ancient Coins is the Roman attitude on handedness. The Latin word for left handed people was sinister manus. The left hand was considered to be evil hence the translation of sinister. Iconography was often interpreted in the context of social norms dictated by the emperor and cultural-related symbolism. For example, according to many scholars, wearing a wedding ring on the third finger of the left hand originated with the Romans, the concept stemming from the belief that the ring would fend off evil associated with the left hand. The custom of shaking right hands with regard to greeting also originated with the Ancient Roman custom of touching right hands to demonstrate the absence of hidden weapons (Emperor Julius Caesar’ notoriously paranoid character may have contributed to this practice).[3] Although iconography can be interpreted in different ways, it is important to consider this detail regarding Roman perception of handedness. 
When looking at the iconography of the reverse side of 2001.243 we might infer that the image is suggesting justice and abundance go hand in hand since the scale and cornucopia are presented opposite each other at an equal height. It could also be interpreted that Justice is more virtuous than abundance since the cornucopia is in the left hand of the woman and the scales are in the right hand. The iconography presents the viewer with the complex depths and dimensions of justice as they relate to its [justice’s] products. The iconography can also be a depiction of the concept that there is not always an easy-to-define correlation between what is just and the fruits it yields. 
In coin 2001.211 Concordia is depicted holding a patera in her right hand and a sceptre in her left hand. The patera is being held with an outstretched arm which would suggest the woman is making an offering of food or drink to the gods in this image. Perhaps the sceptre signifies defending the fatherland and the outstretched patera symbolizes how giving thanks to the gods is essential for protecting the fatherland. Sceptres also often represent nobility or ruling class people like emperors or princesses. This sceptre could be symbolic of a person in power, perhaps signifying that the ruling class give thanks to the gods as well. It could also be symbolizing that the ruling class has a good relationship with the divine.
The final coin we have investigated depicts Salus feeding a snake from her Patera. Salus was a minor goddess. She was the daughter of the god of healing who had sacred snakes. From our knowledge of pateras it is probable that the snakes are receiving an offertory meal from the Patera since they are considered to be divine beings. Often this image of Salus feeding the sacred snakes represents the salvation of the Empire, or the wish for salvation and well being.[4]
In tandem with our research on the meanings behind our respective icons, we also investigated 5 different emperors to see if there is a difference in frequency or usage of cornucopias and pateras. The emperors that we are examining are Marcus Aurelius, Trajan, Vespasian, Domitian, and Galba. We have noticed that each emperor uses these items on their coins in very different frequencies. We were first drawn to investigating the meaning and frequency of pateras and cornucopias when we noticed that Marcus Aurelius frequently used both icons on his coinage which is apparent when we looked at all of the data. 
We decided in order to rule out the varying frequencies being caused by a difference in number of coins minted we had to compare their total number of coins minted. When we took the varying numbers of coins minted by each emperor we found a percentage for the two different icons. 
Name
	# of Patera & %
	# of Cornucopiae & %
	Total # coins minted
	Marcus Aurelius
	224, 12.3%
	339, 18.6%
	1,817
	Galba
	60, 11.4%
	12, 2.2%
	522
	Trajan
	75,  7.9%
	163, 17.3%
	942
	Vespasian
	102, 6.4%
	221, 13.9%
	1588
	Domitian
	10, 1.2%
	65, 7.5%
	859
	



It is clear that out of all the emperors represented in this chart, Marcus Aurelius was the most fond of the symbols of pateras and cornucopias. He may have opted for symbols that represented abundance and offering because he was known to be a philosopher king. He was considered to be a very generous and temperate ruler. Aurelius was considered much more philanthropic than Antoninus Pius and Hadrian, and he was contrasted against notoriously bad emperors like Nero and Domitian.[5] This would explain his frequent use of iconography that ties into food, reverence, and abundance since he was known to be a charitable emperor.
Aurelius was also an embracer of stoicism, a philosophical mode of thought that emphasized a monastic perception of the world, basic logic, and naturalistic ethics. His beliefs encouraged participation in the symbiotic communal lifestyle.[6] This method of thinking is represented in coin 2001.243 for example, which emphasizes the metaphysical value of justice, rather than its products (those products being material possessions or praise). He states in his Meditations, an account of his personal findings on the tenets of stoicism, “If you have seen truly where the matter lies, then leave behind your reputation and be content even if you live the remainder of life, however long [it may be], as your nature wills.” (viii.1) Aurelius wanted a community driven by ethics and good-natured decisions. He asks his audience in this section of his Meditations to reform themselves mentally, asking them to adopt the belief that pleasure is good and pain evil. This mindset suggests becoming resentful of the pleasures indulged in by evil-doers and the pains suffered by the virtuous. His emphasis on virtue would explain his frequent use of the patera, a religious icon. Overall, it is clear that Aurelius was an emperor who concerned himself with the wellbeing of his subjects. He was mindful of their virtue as well as their practical needs such as food.
Emperor Galba seemed to be fond of using a patera in the iconography of his coins- though cornucopias were not frequently found on his coinage. Galba succeeded Nero after a power void was created. He was known for trying to cut back on Nero’s extravagant spending habits which was a move that displease many of his subjects and the senate.[7] He was an unpopular emperor whose primary goal was to fix the financial troubles that Nero caused. He was often cruel and did not follow through with monetary promises. He would levy high taxes on provinces who did not support him - slowing down their economy. He would opt not to pay promised wages and restitutions.[8] Since we have discussed how cornucopias represented abundance and Galba was a stingy man who often hindered the abundance of dissenting provinces, this could explain the absence of cornucopias on most of his coins. We do not know the nature of his religious fervor so it is hard to say why he opted to have pateras on 11.4% of his minted coins. This could be explained by the patera being a universal symbol and commonly used icon in the Ancient Rome. 
Trajan was the second highest result for frequency of cornucopias on his coins, though his usage of Pateras was in the middle of other emperors. Overall, Trajan is revered as a good emperor. His emphasis on self-control with regard to his military-based decisions and self-appointed title as ‘preconsul’ may have contributed to the discrepancy concerning the frequency of pateras, seeing as he prided himself on his achievements largely due to self-competency and not through reverence of the gods like his predecessors.[9] Trajan was known to be charitable, like Marcus Aurelius, to the people of Rome. One example of such charity is increasing the number of poor citizens who received handouts of grain from the state.[10] Marcus Aurelius and Trajan were both charitable emperors who increased abundance for the citizens of Rome which correlates with the higher frequency of cornucopias used while minting their coinage.
        Vespasian used Cornucopias on his coins 13.9% of the time and used pateras 6.4%. Both figures are ranked in the middle of the five emperors we are investigating. Since the data set is fairly small and the data is varied it is hard to understand the relationship between the emperors and their chosen icons for middling frequencies. We know that Vespasian was a very liberal minded emperor who supported education and the sciences. He had many mistresses and enjoyed lewd humor. Suetonius says the only bad thing that could be said about him was his extravagant spending habits. He repealed Galba’s actions that were taken to stop the financial extravagance of Nero’s reign.[11] Perhaps this explains why unlike Galba, his coins were minted with more cornucopia’s because his approach to finances was much more extravagant. He himself lived abundantly and did not spend frugally like Galba did. He was also a champion of science and philosophy, but not particularly of religion. This could explain the limited amount of coins minted with the icon of a patera.
        Domitian’s coins showed a very small amount of pateras being used on his coins (1.2%) and a relatively small amount of cornucopias (7.5%). His reign was described by Suetonius by being full of vices, not virtue. He was known to frequently commune with prostitutes and other women. He was known to be cruel and did not hesitate to kill his subjects for reasons as simple as their appearance. This lack of respect for human life and virtue could explain a lack of religious symbols like a patera on his coinage. As for the cornucopia it is hard to tell what causes the frequency of usage to be 7.5%.
        Our study of the two icons found on Roman Imperial Coinage - the cornucopia and the patera- has revealed that their usage varied based on the values of the emperor in power. There are many different explanations as to the exact meaning of these symbols. Overall, pateras seem to be linked with religion and tend to be used more frequently by the more virtuous emperors. Cornucopias signify abundance and prosperity. We see cornucopias used the most by Marcus Aurelius  and Trajan who were the most charitable emperors of the five we studied. Cornucopias could also reflect the spending mentality of emperors since we see that Vespasian and Domitian (extravagant spenders) used cornucopias more frequently than Galba who was known to be a stingy emperor. Overall there is less of a correlation between the use of pateras on coinage and the nature of the reigns of these five emperors. There is more evidence to suggest that cornucopias were symbols used most by emperors who emphasized charity, and to a lesser degree emperors who had extravagant spending habits. 












































































Works Cited
Stevenson, Seth William, et al. A dictionary of Roman coins: Republican and Imperial. B.A. Seaby, 1982


Welch, Bill. “ Salus and her Snake.” Salus and her Snake on Roman Coins, Forum Ancient Coins, www.forumancientcoins.com/moonmoth/reverse_salus.html.


Kamtekar, Rachana. “Marcus Aurelius.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, 29 Nov. 2010, plato.stanford.edu/entries/marcus-aurelius/#JusActForSakCos.


Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.26.9–11, qtd. and tr. Francis, 21 n. 1


Badian, E. Encyclopedia Britannica, www.britannica.com/biography/Galba.


Suetonius, et al. The Twelve Caesars. Penguin, 2007


Ancel, R. Manning. "Soldiers." Military Heritage. December 2001. 


Hammond, Mason. “Trajan.” Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia Britannica, inc., 18 June 2015, www.britannica.com/biography/Trajan.


 Suetonius, et al. The Twelve Caesars. Penguin, 2007


 Mastin, Luke. “History of Handedness - Ancient History.” Right, Left, Right, Wrong! , www.rightleftrightwrong.com/history_ancient.html.
________________
[1] Stevenson, Seth William, et al. A dictionary of Roman coins: Republican and Imperial. B.A. Seaby, 1982.
[2] ibid
[3] Mastin, Luke. “History of Handedness - Ancient History.” Right, Left, Right, Wrong! , www.rightleftrightwrong.com/history_ancient.html.
[4] Welch, Bill. “ Salus and her Snake.” Salus and her Snake on Roman Coins, Forum Ancient Coins, www.forumancientcoins.com/moonmoth/reverse_salus.html.
[5] Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica 4.26.9–11, qtd. and tr. Francis, 21 n. 1
[6] Kamtekar, Rachana. “Marcus Aurelius.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, 29 Nov. 2010, plato.stanford.edu/entries/marcus-aurelius/#JusActForSakCos.
[7] Badian, E. Encyclopedia Britannica, www.britannica.com/biography/Galba.
[8] Suetonius, et al. The Twelve Caesars. Penguin, 2007
[9] Ancel, R. Manning. "Soldiers." Military Heritage. December 2001. 
[10] Hammond, Mason. “Trajan.” Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia Britannica, inc., 18 June 2015, www.britannica.com/biography/Trajan.
[11]  Suetonius, et al. The Twelve Caesars. Penguin, 2007